Stores reference (#453)
dojo/framework: docs/en/stores/supplemental.md

import { State } from './interfaces';
import { remove, replace } from '@dojo/framework/stores/state/operations';

const createCommand = createCommandFactory<State>();

const addUser = createCommand<User>(({ payload, state }) => {
	const currentUsers = state.users.list || [];
	state.users.list = [...currentUsers, payload];
});
```

Note that attempting to access state is not supported in IE and will immediately throw an error.

# StoreProvider

## StoreProvider API

The StoreProvider accepts three properties

-   `renderer`: A render function that has the store injected in order to access state and pass processes to child widgets.
-   `stateKey`: The key of the state in the registry.
-   `paths` (optional): A function to connect the provider to sections of the state.

## Invalidation

The `StoreProvider` has two main ways to trigger invalidation and cause a rerender.

1.  The recommended approach is to register `path`s by passing the `paths` property to the provider to ensure invalidation will only occur when state you are interested in changes.
1.  A catch-all when no `path`s are defined for the container, it will invalidate when _any_ data changes in the store.

## Pre-typing

> A pre-typed container can be created by extending the standard `StoreProvider` and passing the `State` type as a generic.

Reviewer: I don't think we should really recommend doing this? Soon these will be converted to functional widgets and it won't be possible - at that point we'd be able to provide a util function that can be used to create a "typed" provider.

This is useful when a process involves several commands that alter the state of the store and one of them fails necessitating a rollback.

> undo middleware

```ts
const undoOnFailure = () => {
	return {
		after: () => (error, result) {
			if (error) {
				result.store.apply(result.undoOperations);
			}
		}
	};
};

const process = createProcess('do-something', [
	command1, command2, command3
], [ undoOnFailure ])
```

If any of the commands fail during their execution the `undoOnFailure` middleware will have an opportunity to apply `undoOperations`.

It is important to note that `undoOperations` only apply to the commands fully executed during the process. It will not contain any operations to rollback state that changed as a result of other processes that may be executed asynchronously or state changes performed in middleware or directly on the store itself. These use cases are outside the scope of the undo system.

## Optimistic Updates

Optimistic updating can be used to build a responsive UI despite interactions that might take some time to respond, for example saving to a remote resource.

> In the case of adding a todo item for instance, with optimistic updating, we can immediately add the todo before we even make a request to the server and avoid having an unnatural waiting period or loading indicator. When the server responds we can then reconcile the outcome based on whether it is successful or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in the case of adding a todo item, with optimistic updating we can immediately add the todo before we even make a request to the server, avoiding an unnatural waiting period or loading indicator. When the server responds we can then reconcile the outcome based on whether the action was successful or not.
```

> In the success scenario, we might need to update the added Todo item with an id that was provided in the response from the server and change the color of the Todo item to green to indicate it was successfully saved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the success scenario, we might need to update the added `Todo` item with an `id` provided in the response from the server and change the color of the `Todo` item to green to indicate it was successfully saved.
```

> In the error scenario, it might be that we want to show a notification to say the request failed and turn the Todo item red, with a "retry" button. It's even possible to revert/undo the adding of the Todo item or anything else that happened in the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the error scenario, we might want to show a notification to say the request failed and turn the Todo item red, with a "retry" button. It's even possible to revert/undo the adding of the Todo item or anything else that happened during the process.
```

> Undo example

```ts
const handleAddTodoErrorProcess = createProcess('error', [ () => [ add(path('failed'), true) ]; ]);

const addTodoErrorMiddleware = () => {
	return {
		after: () => (error, result) {
			if (error) {
				result.store.apply(result.undoOperations);
				result.executor(handleAddTodoErrorProcess);
			}
		}
	};
};

const addTodoProcess = createProcess('add-todo', [
		addTodoCommand,
		calculateCountsCommand,
		postTodoCommand,
		calculateCountsCommand
	],
	[ addTodoCallback ]);
```

> -   `addTodoCommand` adds the new todo into the application state

Reviewer 2: similar list formatting question

-   `calculateCountsCommand` recalculates the count of completed and active todo items

> -   `postTodoCommand` posts the todo item to a remote service and using the process `after` middleware we can make changes if there is a failure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `postTodoCommand` posts the todo item to a remote service and, using the process `after` middleware, we can make changes if a failure occurs
```

>     -   on _failure_ the changes are reverted and the failed state field is set to true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    -   on _failure_ the changes get reverted and the failed state field gets set to true
```

    -   on _success_ update the todo item id field with the value received from the remote service
-   `calculateCountsCommand` runs again after the success of `postTodoCommand`

> ### Synchronized updates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Synchronized Updates
```

> In some cases it is better to wait for the server to update for the process to wait until a remote call has been completed. For instance when a process will remove an element from the screen or when the outlet changes to display a different view. Restoring a state that triggered these type of actions can be surprising.

Reviewer 2: "In some cases it is better to wait for the server to update for the process to wait until a remote call has been completed."

I'm having trouble following this.

Reviewer 2: "For instance when a process will remove an element from the screen or when the outlet changes to display a different view. Restoring a state that triggered these type of actions can be surprising." -> "For example, when a process will remove an element from the screen or when the outlet changes to display a different view, restoring a state that triggered these actions can be surprising."

> Since processes support asynchronous commands simply return a `Promise` to wait for a result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because processes support asynchronous commands, simply return a `Promise` to wait for a result.
```

> delete process

```ts
function byId(id: string) {
	return (item: any) => id === item.id;
}

async function deleteTodoCommand({ get, payload: { id } }: CommandRequest) {
	const { todo, index } = find(get('/todos'), byId(id));
	await fetch(`/todo/${todo.id}`, { method: 'DELETE' });
	return [remove(path('todos', index))];
}

const deleteTodoProcess = createProcess('delete', [deleteTodoCommand, calculateCountsCommand]);
```

## Concurrent commands

A `Process` supports concurrent execution of multiple commands by specifying the commands in an array.

> process.ts

```ts
createProcess('my-process', [commandLeft, [concurrentCommandOne, concurrentCommandTwo], commandRight]);
```

> In this example, `commandLeft` is executed, then both `concurrentCommandOne` and `concurrentCommandTwo` are executed concurrently. Once all of the concurrent commands are completed the results are applied in order. If an error occurs in either of the concurrent commands then none of the operations are applied. Finally `commandRight` is executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, `commandLeft` gets executed, then both `concurrentCommandOne` and `concurrentCommandTwo` get executed concurrently. Once all of the concurrent commands are completed the results get applied in order. If an error occurs in either of the concurrent commands then none of the operations get applied. Finally, `commandRight` gets executed.
```

> ## Alternative State implementations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Alternative State Implementations
```

> When a store is instantiated an implementation of the `MutableState` interface is used by default. In most circumstances the default state interface is well optimized and sufficient to use for the general case. If a particular use case merits an alternative implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a store gets instantiated an implementation of the `MutableState` interface gets used by default. In most circumstances the default state interface is well optimized and sufficient to use for the general case. If a particular use case merits an alternative implementation.
```

Reviewer 2: "If a particular use case merits an alternative implementation." incomplete thought here.

> Providing an alternative state

```ts
const store = new Store({ state: myStateImpl });
```

### `MutableState` API

Any `State` implemention must provide four methods to properly apply operations to the state.

> -   `get<S>(path: Path<M, S>): S` takes a `Path` object and returns the value in the current state that that path points to

Reviewer 2: "state that that path points to" reads oddly

-   `at<S extends Path<M, Array<any>>>(path: S, index: number): Path<M, S['value'][0]>` returns a `Path` object that points to the provided `index` in the array at the provided path

> -   `path: StatePaths<M>` is a typesafe way to generate a `Path` object for a given path in the state

Reviewer 2: I think earlier you said type safe or type-safe rather than typesafe

-   `apply(operations: PatchOperation<T>[]): PatchOperation<T>[]` applies the provided operations to the current state

### ImmutableState

> Dojo Stores provide an implementation of the MutableState interface that leverages [Immutable](). This implementation may provide better performance if there are frequent, deep updates to the store's state. Performance should be tested and verified before fully committing to this implementation.

Reviewer: needs a link to immutable?

> Using Immutable

```ts
import State from './interfaces';
import Store from '@dojo/framework/stores/Store';
import Registry from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/Registry';
import ImmutableState from '@dojo/framework/stores/state/ImmutableState';

const registry = new Registry();
const customStore = new ImmutableState<State>();
const store = new Store<State>({ store: customStore });
```

## Local Storage

Dojo Stores provides a collection of tools to leverage local storage.

The local storage middleware watches specified paths for changes and stores them locally on disk using the `id` provided to the `collector` and structure as defined by the path.

> Local storage middleware

```ts
export const myProcess = createProcess(
	'my-process',
	[command],
	collector('my-process', (path) => {
		return [path('state', 'to', 'save'), path('other', 'state', 'to', 'save')];
	})
);
```

The `load` function hydrates a store from `LocalStorage`

> Hydrating state

```ts
import { load } from '@dojo/framework/stores/middleware/localStorage';
import { Store } from '@dojo/framework/stores/Store';

const store = new Store();
load('my-process', store);
```

> Note that data is serialized for storage and the data is overwritten after each process call. This implementation is not appropriate for non-serializable data (e.g. `Date` and `ArrayBuffer`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that data is serialized for storage and the data gets overwritten after each process call. This implementation is not appropriate for non-serializable data (e.g. `Date` and `ArrayBuffer`).
```

# Subscribing to Store changes

> The `Store` has an `onChange(path, callback)` method that takes a path or an array of paths and will call a callback function whenever that state changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Store` has an `onChange(path, callback)` method that takes a path or an array of paths and invokes a callback function whenever that state changes.
```

> main.ts

```ts
const store = new Store<State>();
const { path } = store;

store.onChange(path('auth', 'token'), () => {
	console.log('new login');
});

store.onChange([path('users', 'current'), path('users', 'list')], () => {
	// Make sure the current user is in the user list
});
```

The `Store` also has an `invalidate` event that fires any time the store changes.

> main.ts

```ts
store.on('invalidate', () => {
	// do something when the store's state has been updated.
});
```

> # JSON Patch and Store operations

Reviewer: Should we mention JSON patch?

Reviewer: I'm not sure this whole section is required? What do other people think?

Reviewer 2: I think JSON Patch is cool, so to me it's worth mentioning. :)

Reviewer: I would say though, although it's based on JSON patch it's not implemented to exact spec - also it's something that we could change i.e. an implementation detail

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should mention JSON patch at all. It is 100% an implementation detail and we do not let the user write/pass JSON patch anywhere. As @agubler said also we do not fulfil the entire spec (nor do we intend to).

> # JSON Patch and Store operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# JSON Patch and Store Operations
```

In the basic usage guide we show how Dojo Stores use operations in detail to make changes to the underlying state of an application. There are a few more advanced points that are not covered in the basic usage guide.

First and foremost Dojo Stores was designed with simplicity in mind. For instance, operations will automatically create the underlying structure necessary to support an `add` or `replace` operation.

> Deep `add` in an uninitialized store

```ts
import Store from '@dojo/framework/stores/Store';
import { add } from '@dojo/framework/stores/state/operations';

const store = new Store<State>();
const { at, path, apply } = store;
const user = { id: '0', name: 'Paul' };

apply([add(at(path('users', 'list'), 10), user)]);
```

> Result

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Most of our other guide examples use spaces for indentation, so we may want to change this for consistency?

{
	"users": {
		"list": [
			{
				"id": "0",
				"name": "Paul"
			}
		]
	}
}
```

Even though state has not been initialized, Dojo is able to create the underlying hierarchy based on the provided path. This operation is safe because of the type safety that TypeScript and Dojo Stores provide. This allows for users to work naturally with the `State` interface used by the store instead of needing to be concerned with the data explicitly held by the store.

> When an explicit state is required that information can asserted by using a `test` operation or by getting the underlying data and validating it programmatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an explicit state is required, that information can get asserted by using a `test` operation or by getting the underlying data and validating it programmatically.
```

This example will throw a test exception since `/users/list` has not been initialized.

> Using `test` to ensure initialization

```ts
import Store from "@dojo/framework/stores/Store";
import { test } from "@dojo/framework/stores/state/operations";

const store = new Store<State>();
const { at, path, apply } = store;

apply([
	test(at(path('users', 'list', 'length), 0))
]);
```

> This example ensures that `user` is always added to the end of the list as the last element.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example ensures that `user` always gets added to the end of the list as the last element.
```

> Programmatic introspection

```ts
import Store from '@dojo/framework/stores/Store';
import { add, test } from '@dojo/framework/stores/state/operations';

const store = new Store<State>();
const { get, at, path, apply } = store;
const user = { id: '0', name: 'Paul' };
const pos = get(path('users', 'list', 'length')) || 0;
apply([
	add(at(path('users', 'list'), pos), user),
	test(at(path('users', 'list'), pos), user),
	test(path('users', 'list', 'length'), pos + 1)
]);
```

> Access to state root is not permitted and will throw an error, for example, `get(path('/'))`. This applies to Operations also, it is not possible to create an operation that will update the state root. Best practices with @dojo/framework/stores mean touching the smallest part of the store as is necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access to state root is not permitted and will throw an error, for example, `get(path('/'))`. This restriction also applies to Operations; it is not possible to create an operation that will update the state root. Best practices with `@dojo/framework/stores` encourage accessing the smallest necessary part of the store.
```
